Adding documentation (#46)
elastic/apm-agent-android: docs/configuration.asciidoc

[[configuration]]
== Configuration

[float]
=== Gradle configuration

Configure your application at compile time within your application's `build.gradle` file:

[source,groovy]
----
// Android app's build.gradle file
plugins {
    //...
    id "co.elastic.apm.android" version "[latest_version]"
}

elasticApm {
    // Minimal configuration

>     serverUrl = "https://your.elastic.server"

Reviewer: We explain the default for every config other than this one. What is the default value?

    // Optional
    serviceName = "your app name" <1>
    serviceVersion = "0.0.0" <2>
    secretToken = "your server auth token" <3>
}
----
<1> Defaults to your `android.defaultConfig.applicationId` value.
<2> Defaults to your `android.defaultConfig.versionName` value.
<3> Defaults to null.

All of the values provided in the Gradle configuration can be overridden with the following environment variables:

|===
|Config |Associated Environment variable

|serviceName
|`ELASTIC_APM_SERVICE_NAME`

|serviceVersion
|`ELASTIC_APM_SERVICE_VERSION`

|serverUrl
|`ELASTIC_APM_SERVER_URL`

|secretToken
|`ELASTIC_APM_SECRET_TOKEN`

|===

[float]
=== Runtime configuration

> The runtime configuration is provided within your https://developer.android.com/reference/android/app/Application[Application] class at the time of initializing the Elastic agent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The runtime configuration is provided within your https://developer.android.com/reference/android/app/Application[Application] class when initializing the Elastic agent.
```

> This configuration can override any previously-set compile time configuration.

Reviewer: This _can_ override compile-time config? Or it _does_ overwrite compile-time config when set?

Author: Nice catch, it _does_ overwrite it, compile config stands no chance against the runtime one 😄

> The way it works is by providing your own instance of the `ElasticApmConfiguration` class as shown below

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Runtime configuration works is by providing your own instance of the `ElasticApmConfiguration` class as shown below:
```

[source,java]
----
// Application class

class MyApp extends android.app.Application {

    @Override
    public void onCreate() {
        super.onCreate();
        ElasticApmAgent.initialize(this, ElasticApmConfiguration.builder().build());
    }
}
----

[float]

> ==== APM server connectivity

Reviewer: ```suggestion
==== APM Server connectivity
```

> The server connectivity parameters can be provided at compile time, either by using the gradle dsl configuration, or by providing the server connectivity related environment variables as mentioned above.
> Later on, when the app is running, the connectivity parameters can be overriden by providing a custom `Connectivity` instance when initializing the Elastic agent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The APM Server connectivity parameters can be provided at compile time, either by using the Gradle DSL configuration or by providing the APM Server connectivity-related environment variables as mentioned above.
Later on, when the app is running, the connectivity parameters can be overridden by providing a custom `Connectivity` instance when initializing the Elastic agent.
```

> The `Connectivity` interface provides a set of convenient methods to avoid having to create your own implementation in case you need to define a custom connectivity.

Reviewer: I'm not sure I understand what this sentence is trying to say.

Author: I see, that's interesting. I think this might be the case of adding extra information that might cause confusion instead of helping much 😅 - So basically, `Connectivity` is an interface, so anyone can just create their own implementation and that would do. However, there are some common use cases for which I created helper methods, which might be easier to use rather than creating your own class that implements `Connectivity`. You can see those methods [here](https://github.com/elastic/apm-agent-android/pull/46/files#diff-6817141da84f46b7b26749d24c6bab4f40ace13bbc872a001df621335810613c).

I was thinking about maybe adding some examples here, but it really isn't necessary to use said helper methods to make it work, so I guess it'd be better if we just added a link to the `Connectivity` interface Javadoc, in case people are interested in seeing the code doc for it, where all the helper methods are described. It might be better as well for maintainability in the future, in case this interface changes, then this doc won't get inaccurate. However, for now I don't have the Javadoc link since the library isn't deployed yet, so for now I'm just going to remove it to avoid confusion 👍

Once you've created your `Connectivity` instance, you can set it into the agent's initialization as show below:

[source,java]
----
class MyApp extends android.app.Application {

    @Override
    public void onCreate() {
        super.onCreate();
        Connectivity myCustomConnectivity = Connectivity.custom(/*params*/);
        ElasticApmAgent.initialize(this, myCustomConnectivity);

        // Optionally if you also define a custom configuration:
        // ElasticApmAgent.initialize(this, ElasticApmConfiguration.builder().build(), myCustomConnectivity);
    }
}
----

[float]

> ==== Application id configuration

Reviewer: Should ID be capitalized here?

Author: Now that you mention it, it makes sense to capitalize it yeah! I just pushed the changes :)

> You can provide your application name and version dynamically by setting those when building your `ElasticApmConfiguration` instance as show below

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can provide your application name and version dynamically by setting those when building your `ElasticApmConfiguration` instance as show below:
```

[source,java]
----
class MyApp extends android.app.Application {

    @Override
    public void onCreate() {
        super.onCreate();
        ElasticApmConfiguration configuration = ElasticApmConfiguration.builder()
                .setServiceName("my-custom-name")
                .setServiceVersion("1.0.0")
                .build();
        ElasticApmAgent.initialize(this, configuration);
    }
}
----

[float]
==== HTTP Configuration

The agent provides a configuration object for HTTP-related spans named `HttpTraceConfiguration`.
You can pass an instance of it to the `ElasticApmConfiguration` object when initializing the agent in order to customize how the HTTP spans should be handled.

[float]
===== Filtering HTTP requests from getting traced

By default, all of your app's HTTP requests will get traced.
You can avoid some requests from getting traced by creating your own `HttpExclusionRule`.

> For example this is an exclusion rule that prevents all requests with the host `127.0.0.1` from getting traced:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, this is an exclusion rule that prevents all requests with the host `127.0.0.1` from getting traced:
```

[source,java]
----
class MyHttpExclusionRule extends HttpExclusionRule {

    @Override
    public boolean exclude(HttpRequest request) {
        return request.url.getHost().equals("127.0.0.1");
    }
}
----

> Then you'd need to add it to Elastic's Agent config through its `HttpTraceConfiguration` like so:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then you'd need to add it to Elastic's Agent config through its `HttpTraceConfiguration`, like so:
```

[source,java]
----
class MyApp extends android.app.Application {

    @Override
    public void onCreate() {
        super.onCreate();
        HttpTraceConfiguration httpConfig = HttpTraceConfiguration.builder()
            .addExclusionRule(new MyHttpExclusionRule())
            .build();
        ElasticApmConfiguration configuration = ElasticApmConfiguration.builder()
                .setHttpTraceConfiguration(httpConfig)
                .build();
        ElasticApmAgent.initialize(this, configuration);
    }
}
----

[float]
===== Adding extra attributes to your HTTP requests' spans

If the HTTP span attributes https://github.com/elastic/apm/tree/main/specs/agents/mobile[provided by default] aren't enough, you can attach your own `HttpAttributesVisitor` to add extra params to each HTTP request being traced.
For example:

[source,java]
----
class MyHttpAttributesVisitor implements HttpAttributesVisitor {

    public void visit(AttributesBuilder attrsBuilder, HttpRequest request) {
        attrsBuilder.put("my_custom_attr_key", "my_custom_attr_value");
    }
}
----

> Then you'd need to add it to Elastic's Agent config through its `HttpTraceConfiguration` like so:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then you'd need to add it to Elastic's Agent config through its `HttpTraceConfiguration`, like so:
```

[source,java]
----
class MyApp extends android.app.Application {

    @Override
    public void onCreate() {
        super.onCreate();
        HttpTraceConfiguration httpConfig = HttpTraceConfiguration.builder()
        .addHttpAttributesVisitor(new MyHttpAttributesVisitor())
        .build();
        ElasticApmConfiguration configuration = ElasticApmConfiguration.builder()
                .setHttpTraceConfiguration(httpConfig)
                .build();
        ElasticApmAgent.initialize(this, configuration);
    }
}
----

[float]
==== Trace spans attributes notes

> There are common attributes that the Elastic Agent gather for every Span, and those are listed https://github.com/elastic/apm/tree/main/specs/agents/mobile[here].
> 
> However, due to the nature of Android's OS when it comes to collect some device-related data, some of the above mentioned resources require the Host app (your app) to have some runtime permissions granted.
> If their corresponding permissions aren't granted, then they won't be collected and nothing will be sent for those attributes.
> Those are the following:

Reviewer: We have to be careful about saying "Elastic Agent" as that refers to the Elastic Agent, not the APM agent.

```suggestion
There are https://github.com/elastic/apm/tree/main/specs/agents/mobile[common attributes] that the Elastic APM agent gathers for every Span.
However, due to the nature of Android's OS, to collect some device-related data some of the above-mentioned resources require the Host app (your app) to have specific runtime permissions granted.
If the corresponding permissions aren't granted, then the device data won't be collected, and nothing will be sent for those attributes.
This table outlines the attributes and their corresponding permissions:
```

By default, the Elastic agent generates a session ID on every app launch and keeps it until the app is terminated, or generates a new one after an idle period of time of 30 minutes.

If the aforementioned default behavior doesn't suit your needs, you can provide your own `SessionIdProvider` instance where you could return your own session IDs which will be generated based on your custom logic.
For example:

[source,java]
----

public class MyCustomSessionIdProvider implements SessionIdProvider {

    @NonNull
    @Override
    public String getSessionId() {
        // Your custom logic to decide which ID to return.
    }
}
----

And then you can set it to the Elastic agent like so:

[source,java]
----
class MyApp extends android.app.Application {

    @Override
    public void onCreate() {
        super.onCreate();
        ElasticApmConfiguration configuration = ElasticApmConfiguration.builder()
                .setSessionIdProvider(new MyCustomSessionIdProvider())
                .build();
        ElasticApmAgent.initialize(this, configuration);
    }
}
----

[float]
==== Advanced configurable options

> The configurable parameters provided by the Elastic agent aim to help configuring common use cases in an easy way, in most of the cases it means to act as a facade between your application and the Open Telemetry Java SDK that this agent is built on top.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The configurable parameters provided by the Elastic APM agent aim to help configuring common use cases in an easy way, in most of the cases it means to act as a facade between your application and the Open Telemetry Java SDK that this agent is built on top.
```
